README.rst, before:

=====================
py-esp32-ulp
=====================

.. image:: ../../actions/workflows/run_tests.yaml/badge.svg
   :height: 20px
   :target: ../../actions/workflows/run_tests.yaml
   :alt: Build Status

py-esp32-ulp is an assembler toolchain for the ESP32 ULP (Ultra Low-Power)
Co-Processor, written in MicroPython.

It can translate small assembly language programs to a loadable/executable
ULP machine code binary, directly on the ESP32 microcontroller.

This is intended as an alternative approach to assembling such programs using
the binutils-esp32ulp toolchain from Espressif on a development machine.


Features
--------

The following features are supported:

* the entire `ESP32 ULP instruction set <https://esp-idf.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api-guides/ulp_instruction_set.html>`_
* constants defined with ``.set``
* constants defined with ``#define``
* expressions in assembly code and constant definitions
* RTC convenience macros (e.g. WRITE_RTC_REG)
* many ESP32 ULP code examples found on the web will work unmodified


Quick start
-----------

To get going run the following directly on the ESP32:

.. code-block:: python

   # Step 1: Install py-esp32-ulp
   # IMPORTANT: Ensure the ESP32 is connected to a network with internet connectivity.
   import upip
   upip.install('micropython-py-esp32-ulp')

   # Step 2: Run an example
   # First, upload examples/counter.py to the ESP32.
   import counter

The `counter.py </examples/counter.py>`_ example shows how to assemble code, load
and run the resulting binary and exchange data between the ULP and the main CPU.

You can also try the `blink.py </examples/blink.py>`_ example, which shows how to
let the ULP blink an LED.


Documentation
-------------
See `docs/index.rst </docs/index.rst>`_.


Requirements
------------

The minimum supported version of MicroPython is v1.12.

An ESP32 is required to run the ULP machine code binary produced by py-esp32-ulp
(the ESP32-S2 will not work as it is not binary compatible with the ESP32).


License
-------

This project is released under the `MIT License </LICENSE>`_.

Commit message:

remove duplication between README and Documentation
Also move badges to the top of README where they can be
stripped away more easily when generating the project
description for PyPI.

README.rst, after:

.. start-badges

.. image:: ../../actions/workflows/run_tests.yaml/badge.svg
   :height: 20px
   :target: ../../actions/workflows/run_tests.yaml
   :alt: Build Status

.. end-badges

=====================
py-esp32-ulp
=====================

py-esp32-ulp is an assembler toolchain for the ESP32 ULP (Ultra Low-Power)
Co-Processor, written in MicroPython.

It can translate small assembly language programs to a loadable/executable
ULP machine code binary, directly on the ESP32 microcontroller.

This is intended as an alternative approach to assembling such programs using
the binutils-esp32ulp toolchain from Espressif on a development machine.

It can also be useful in cases where binutils-esp32ulp is not available.


Features
--------

The following features are supported:

* the entire `ESP32 ULP instruction set <https://esp-idf.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api-guides/ulp_instruction_set.html>`_
* constants defined with ``.set``
* constants defined with ``#define``
* expressions in assembly code and constant definitions
* RTC convenience macros (e.g. WRITE_RTC_REG)
* many ESP32 ULP code examples found on the web will work unmodified


Quick start
-----------

To get going run the following directly on the ESP32:

.. code-block:: python

   # Step 1: Install py-esp32-ulp
   # IMPORTANT: Ensure the ESP32 is connected to a network with internet connectivity.
   import upip
   upip.install('micropython-py-esp32-ulp')

   # Step 2: Run an example
   # First, upload examples/counter.py to the ESP32.
   import counter

The `counter.py </examples/counter.py>`_ example shows how to assemble code, load
and run the resulting binary and exchange data between the ULP and the main CPU.


Documentation
-------------
See `docs/index.rst </docs/index.rst>`_.


Requirements
------------

The minimum supported version of MicroPython is v1.12.

An ESP32 is required to run the ULP machine code binary produced by py-esp32-ulp
(the ESP32-S2 will not work as it is not binary compatible with the ESP32).


License
-------

This project is released under the `MIT License </LICENSE>`_.
