docs/index.rst, before:

micropython-esp32-ulp Documentation
===================================

.. contents:: Table of Contents


Overview
--------

`README.rst </README.rst>`_ gives a general overview of this project.


Installation
------------

On the ESP32, install using upip:

.. code-block:: python

   # ensure the ESP32 is connected to a network with internet connectivity
   import upip
   upip.install('micropython-esp32-ulp')

On a PC, simply ``git clone`` this repo.


Getting started
---------------

On the ESP32
++++++++++++

The simplest example to try on the ESP32 is `counter.py </examples/counter.py>`_.
It shows how to assemble code, load and run the resulting binary and exchange
data between the ULP and the main CPU.

Run the ``counter.py`` example:

1. Install micropython-esp32-ulp onto the ESP32 as shown above
2. Upload the `examples/counter.py </examples/counter.py>`_ file to the ESP32
3. Run with ``import counter``

You can also try the `blink.py </examples/blink.py>`_ example, which shows how to
let the ULP blink an LED.

Look inside each example for a more detailed description.


On a PC
+++++++

On a PC with the unix port of MicroPython, you can assemble source code as
follows:

.. code-block:: shell

   git clone https://github.com/micropython/micropython-esp32-ulp.git
   cd micropython-esp32-ulp
   micropython -m esp32_ulp path/to/code.S  # this results in path/to/code.ulp

The assembler supports selecting a CPU to assemble for using the ``-c`` option
(valid cpu's are ``esp32`` and ``esp32s2``):

.. code-block:: shell

   micropython -m esp32_ulp -c esp32s2 path/to/code.S  # assemble for an ESP32-S2


More examples
+++++++++++++

Other ULP examples from around the web:

* https://github.com/espressif/esp-iot-solution/tree/master/examples/ulp_examples
* https://github.com/duff2013/ulptool
* https://github.com/joba-1/Blink-ULP/blob/master/main/ulp/


Advanced usage
--------------

In some applications you might want to separate the assembly stage from the
loading/running stage, to avoid having to assemble the code on every startup.
This can be useful in battery-powered applications where every second of sleep
time matters.

Splitting the assembly and load stage can be combined with other techniques,
for example to implement a caching mechansim for the ULP binary that
automatically updates the binary every time the assembly source code changes.

The ``esp32_ulp.assemble_file`` function can be used to assemble and link an
assembly source file into a machine code binary file with a ``.ulp`` extension.
That file can then be loaded directly without assembling the source again.

1. Create/upload an assembly source file and run the following to get a
   loadable ULP binary as a ``.ulp`` file (specify ``cpu='esp32s2'`` if you
   have an ESP32-S2 or ESP32-S3 device):

   .. code-block:: python

      import esp32_ulp
      esp32_ulp.assemble_file('code.S', cpu='esp32')  # this results in code.ulp

2. The above prints out the offsets of all global symbols/labels. For the next
   step, you will need to note down the offset of the label, which represents
   the entry point to your code.

3. Now load and run the resulting binary as follows:

   .. code-block:: python

      from esp32 import ULP

      ulp = ULP()
      with open('test.ulp', 'r') as f:
          # load the binary into RTC memory
          ulp.load_binary(0, f.read())

          # configure how often the ULP should wake up
          ulp.set_wakeup_period(0, 500000)  # 500k usec == 0.5 sec

          # start the ULP
          # assemble_file printed offsets in number of 32-bit words.
          # ulp.run() expects an offset in number of bytes.
          # Thus, multiply the offset to our entry point by 4.
          # e.g. for an offset of 2:
          #   2 words * 4 = 8 bytes
          ulp.run(2*4)  # specify the offset of the entry point label

To update the binary every time the source code changes, you would need a
mechanism to detect that the source code changed. This could trigger a re-run
of the ``assemble_file`` function to update the binary. Manually re-running
this function as needed would also work.


Preprocessor
------------

There is a simple preprocessor that understands just enough to allow assembling
ULP source files containing convenience macros such as WRITE_RTC_REG. This is
especially useful for assembling ULP examples from Espressif or other ULP code
found as part of Arduino/ESP-IDF projects.

The preprocessor and how to use it is documented here: `Preprocessor support </docs/preprocess.rst>`_.


Disassembler
------------
There is a disassembler for disassembling ULP binary code. This is mainly used to
inspect what instructions our assembler created, however it can be used to analyse
any ULP binaries.

The disassembler and how to use it is documented here: `Disassembler </docs/disassembler.rst>`_.


Limitations
-----------

Currently the following are not supported:

* assembler macros using ``.macro``
* preprocessor macros using ``#define A(x,y) ...``
* including files using ``#include``


Testing
-------

There are unit tests and also compatibility tests that check whether the binary
output is identical with what Espressif's esp32-elf-as (from their `binutils-gdb fork
<https://github.com/espressif/binutils-gdb/tree/esp32ulp-elf-2.35>`_) produces.

micropython-esp32-ulp has been tested on the Unix port of MicroPython and on real ESP32
devices with the chip type ESP32D0WDQ6 (revision 1) without SPIRAM as well as ESP32-S2
(ESP32-S2FH4) and ESP32-S3 (ESP32-S3R8) devices.

Consult the Github Actions `workflow definition file </.github/workflows/run_tests.yaml>`_
for how to run the different tests.


Links
-----

Espressif documentation:

* `ESP32 ULP coprocessor instruction set <https://esp-idf.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api-guides/ulp_instruction_set.html>`_
* `ESP32 Technical Reference Manual <https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32_technical_reference_manual_en.pdf>`_

GNU Assembler "as" documentation (we try to be compatible for all features that are implemented)

* `GNU Assembler manual <https://sourceware.org/binutils/docs/as/index.html>`_

Commit message:

Update documentation about installing with mip
Add documentation for installing with `mip`. Keep the instructions
for installing using `upip` for now, as we still intend to publish
to PyPI for now, and thereby keep supporting installing on older
MicroPython versions, which do not yet have `mip`.

docs/index.rst, after:

micropython-esp32-ulp Documentation
===================================

.. contents:: Table of Contents


Overview
--------

`README.rst </README.rst>`_ gives a general overview of this project.


Installation
------------

On the ESP32, install using mip (or upip on older MicroPythons):

.. code-block:: python

   # step 1: ensure the ESP32 is connected to a network with internet connectivity

   # step 2 (for MicroPython 1.20 or newer)
   import mip
   mip.install('github:micropython/micropython-esp32-ulp')

   # step 2 (for MicroPython older than 1.20)
   import upip
   upip.install('micropython-esp32-ulp')

On a PC, simply ``git clone`` this repo.


Getting started
---------------

On the ESP32
++++++++++++

The simplest example to try on the ESP32 is `counter.py </examples/counter.py>`_.
It shows how to assemble code, load and run the resulting binary and exchange
data between the ULP and the main CPU.

Run the ``counter.py`` example:

1. Install micropython-esp32-ulp onto the ESP32 as shown above
2. Upload the `examples/counter.py </examples/counter.py>`_ file to the ESP32
3. Run with ``import counter``

You can also try the `blink.py </examples/blink.py>`_ example, which shows how to
let the ULP blink an LED.

Look inside each example for a more detailed description.


On a PC
+++++++

On a PC with the unix port of MicroPython, you can assemble source code as
follows:

.. code-block:: shell

   git clone https://github.com/micropython/micropython-esp32-ulp.git
   cd micropython-esp32-ulp
   micropython -m esp32_ulp path/to/code.S  # this results in path/to/code.ulp

The assembler supports selecting a CPU to assemble for using the ``-c`` option
(valid cpu's are ``esp32`` and ``esp32s2``):

.. code-block:: shell

   micropython -m esp32_ulp -c esp32s2 path/to/code.S  # assemble for an ESP32-S2


More examples
+++++++++++++

Other ULP examples from around the web:

* https://github.com/espressif/esp-iot-solution/tree/master/examples/ulp_examples
* https://github.com/duff2013/ulptool
* https://github.com/joba-1/Blink-ULP/blob/master/main/ulp/


Advanced usage
--------------

In some applications you might want to separate the assembly stage from the
loading/running stage, to avoid having to assemble the code on every startup.
This can be useful in battery-powered applications where every second of sleep
time matters.

Splitting the assembly and load stage can be combined with other techniques,
for example to implement a caching mechansim for the ULP binary that
automatically updates the binary every time the assembly source code changes.

The ``esp32_ulp.assemble_file`` function can be used to assemble and link an
assembly source file into a machine code binary file with a ``.ulp`` extension.
That file can then be loaded directly without assembling the source again.

1. Create/upload an assembly source file and run the following to get a
   loadable ULP binary as a ``.ulp`` file (specify ``cpu='esp32s2'`` if you
   have an ESP32-S2 or ESP32-S3 device):

   .. code-block:: python

      import esp32_ulp
      esp32_ulp.assemble_file('code.S', cpu='esp32')  # this results in code.ulp

2. The above prints out the offsets of all global symbols/labels. For the next
   step, you will need to note down the offset of the label, which represents
   the entry point to your code.

3. Now load and run the resulting binary as follows:

   .. code-block:: python

      from esp32 import ULP

      ulp = ULP()
      with open('test.ulp', 'r') as f:
          # load the binary into RTC memory
          ulp.load_binary(0, f.read())

          # configure how often the ULP should wake up
          ulp.set_wakeup_period(0, 500000)  # 500k usec == 0.5 sec

          # start the ULP
          # assemble_file printed offsets in number of 32-bit words.
          # ulp.run() expects an offset in number of bytes.
          # Thus, multiply the offset to our entry point by 4.
          # e.g. for an offset of 2:
          #   2 words * 4 = 8 bytes
          ulp.run(2*4)  # specify the offset of the entry point label

To update the binary every time the source code changes, you would need a
mechanism to detect that the source code changed. This could trigger a re-run
of the ``assemble_file`` function to update the binary. Manually re-running
this function as needed would also work.


Preprocessor
------------

There is a simple preprocessor that understands just enough to allow assembling
ULP source files containing convenience macros such as WRITE_RTC_REG. This is
especially useful for assembling ULP examples from Espressif or other ULP code
found as part of Arduino/ESP-IDF projects.

The preprocessor and how to use it is documented here: `Preprocessor support </docs/preprocess.rst>`_.


Disassembler
------------
There is a disassembler for disassembling ULP binary code. This is mainly used to
inspect what instructions our assembler created, however it can be used to analyse
any ULP binaries.

The disassembler and how to use it is documented here: `Disassembler </docs/disassembler.rst>`_.


Limitations
-----------

Currently the following are not supported:

* assembler macros using ``.macro``
* preprocessor macros using ``#define A(x,y) ...``
* including files using ``#include``


Testing
-------

There are unit tests and also compatibility tests that check whether the binary
output is identical with what Espressif's esp32-elf-as (from their `binutils-gdb fork
<https://github.com/espressif/binutils-gdb/tree/esp32ulp-elf-2.35>`_) produces.

micropython-esp32-ulp has been tested on the Unix port of MicroPython and on real ESP32
devices with the chip type ESP32D0WDQ6 (revision 1) without SPIRAM as well as ESP32-S2
(ESP32-S2FH4) and ESP32-S3 (ESP32-S3R8) devices.

Consult the Github Actions `workflow definition file </.github/workflows/run_tests.yaml>`_
for how to run the different tests.


Links
-----

Espressif documentation:

* `ESP32 ULP coprocessor instruction set <https://esp-idf.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api-guides/ulp_instruction_set.html>`_
* `ESP32 Technical Reference Manual <https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32_technical_reference_manual_en.pdf>`_

GNU Assembler "as" documentation (we try to be compatible for all features that are implemented)

* `GNU Assembler manual <https://sourceware.org/binutils/docs/as/index.html>`_
